feat: Gatekeeper policy migration guide. (#627)
kubewarden/docs: docs/howtos/gatekeeper-migration.md

focuses on the step-by-step process of extracting Gatekeeper Custom Resource
Definitions (CRDs) and migrating them into a functional Kubewarden policy. It
uses a basic Gatekeeper demo policy Prerequisites:

- [opa](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/opa/releases): you use this tool
  to build the code into wasm. This guide was written using the `v1.5.1` version.
- [`kwctl`](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/releases): tool you use to
  prepare and run Kubewarden web assembly module
- [`bats`](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core): tool used to run end-to-end
  tests. If you decided to write such kind of tests
- [yq](https://github.com/mikefarah/yq): tool used to extract data from yaml files

## Before migrate your policies

Before starting the process of migrating Gatekeeper policies, consider using
already available policies in the Kubewarden
[catalog](https://artifacthub.io/packages/search?kind=13). Some of the
[policies](https://github.com/kubewarden/rego-policies-library) are publicly
available OPA and Gatekeeper policies migrated to Kubewarden

Also, take a look at our
[comparison](docs/explanations/comparisons/opa-comparison.md) documentation

> between Kubewarden and Gatekeeper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between Kubewarden and Gatekeeper.
```

---
sidebar_label: Migrating Gatekeeper Policies to Kubewarden
title: "Migrating Gatekeeper Policies to Kubewarden"
description: "Migrating Gatekeeper Policies to Kubewarden"
keywords: [kubewarden, gatekeeper]
doc-persona:
  [kubewarden-operator, kubewarden-integrator, kubewarden-policy-developer]
doc-type: [howto]
doc-topic: [operator-manual]
---

This guide shows you how to convert an existing Gatekeeper policy into a
Kubewarden policy. This process involves two main steps:

1. Compile the Rego program into a WebAssembly (Wasm) module.
2. Distribute the WebAssembly module as a Kubewarden policy.

The [Rego policies
tutorial](docs/tutorials/writing-policies/rego/01-intro-rego.md) covers most of
the build process for compiling Rego code into a WebAssembly module. This guide
focuses on the step-by-step process of extracting Gatekeeper Custom Resource
Definitions (CRDs) and migrating them into a functional Kubewarden policy. It
uses a basic Gatekeeper demo policy Prerequisites:

- [opa](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/opa/releases): you use this tool

>   to build the code into wasm. This guide was written using the `v1.5.1` version.

Reviewer 2: It's good we're explicit about the version we're using. We can then ignore all the cases when someone uses `opa` < 1.0.0 later on.

breaking change was introduced regarding Rego policy syntax.

Previously, `if` for all rule definitions and `contains` for multi-value rules were
optional; now, they're mandatory. This change affects most older policies.

Here's a summary of what you need to know:

- OPA v1.0.0 Syntax: OPA v1.0.0 mandates the use of `if` for all rule definitions
  and `contains` for multi-value rules. Policies not adhering to this syntax will
  break.
- Backward Compatibility: If you need to build older policies that don't use
  the new v1.0.0 syntax, you must provide the `--v0-compatible` flag to the `opa
  build` command.
- Gatekeeper integration: Gatekeeper updated its OPA dependency to v1.0.0 in
  its v3.19.0 release.
- Rego version in Gatekeeper templates: Gatekeeper assumes `v0` syntax is used
  unless the template explicitly specifies `version: "v1"` within the `source` field
  under `code.engine: Rego`.
- For example, to explicitly use Rego v1 syntax in a Gatekeeper template:

```yaml
targets:
  - target: admission.k8s.gatekeeper.sh
    code:
      - engine: Rego
        source:
          version: "v1"
          rego: |
            # <v1-rego-code>
```

What this means for you:

> - If your Rego policy template **doesn't** specify a `version` (or implies `v0`): You
>   must either call the `Makefile` target with the `OPA_V0_COMPATIBLE=true` variable
>   (for example, `make OPA_V0_COMPATIBLE=true`) to ensure you call `opa` commands with the
>   `--v0-compatible` flag, or update your policy to the new `v1.0.0` syntax.
> - If your Rego policy template explicitly specifies `version: "v1"`: You must use
>   a recent version of OPA (v1.0.0 or later), and no special build flags are
>   required for the `opa build` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the Gatekeeper CR doesn't specify a Rego version, it implies `v0` is going to be
  used. You must invoke build the policy using the `OPA_V0_COMPATIBLE=true make` command. 
- If the Gatekeeper CR explicitly specifies `version: "v1"`, you must invoke build the policy using the without any environment variable set.
```

```
opa build -t wasm -e policy/violation -o bundle.tar.gz policy.rego
error: load error: 2 errors occurred during loading:
policy.rego:3: rego_parse_error: `if` keyword is required before rule body
policy.rego:3: rego_parse_error: `contains` keyword is required for partial set rules
make: *** [Makefile:4: policy.wasm] Error 1
```

The policy author must fix these errors to allow the `opa` CLI to build the code
successfully. The specific changes may vary depending on the `opa` version and
the original policy code. For this example, the final `policy.rego` code looks
like this:

```rego
package policy

violation contains {"msg": msg, "details": {"missing_labels": missing}} if {
  provided := {label | input.review.object.metadata.labels[label]}
  required := {label | label := input.parameters.labels[_]}
  missing := required - provided
  count(missing) > 0
  msg = sprintf("you must provide labels: %v", [missing])
}
```

After you adjust the code, build the policy:

```console
$ make policy.wasm
opa build -t wasm -e policy/violation -o bundle.tar.gz policy.rego
tar xvf bundle.tar.gz /policy.wasm
tar: Removing leading `/' from member names
/policy.wasm
rm bundle.tar.gz

> touch policy.wasm # opa creates the bundle with unix epoch timestamp, fix it

Author: Not yet:

```
-rw-------  1 jvanz users 147K Dec 31  1969 policy.wasm
```
